[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I relate the problem with
our foods in a very similar way
to relating the problem with
the globe and global warming,
that it is a serious problem.
There are solutions to it.
But we've got to look
at the right solutions.
But before we do, we've
got to actually define
what the problem is.
And part of the problem is
modern agricultural systems,
monoculture, where soils
are used and used and used,
and nutrients are
drawn out of the soils,
and the soils
become new deserts.
And that's happening worldwide.
And we do really need to look
at our systems of agriculture
and what we are really eating
and how we're producing food.
Nearly every food that you will
find in the shops in a big city
has been processed.
It has been delayed to market.
It's been picked ripe.
Quite often, nutrients have
deteriorated or disappeared
from the food by the time
it gets onto the plate.
And you might
think you're eating
a well-balanced Australian
or American diet,
but it's more than likely
unbalanced, often deficient,
but quite often, also,
there are additives
that contribute to a range
of diseases-- salt, sugar,
saturated fats, colorings,
flavorings, preservatives,
things that have an adverse
effect on the immune system,
the communication system, the
nervous system, the defense
systems in our body, things
that really, in the long term,
can cause massive
damage to cells
and subcellular
structures in the body.
If you look at fertilizers, for
example, synthetic fertilizers,
you can make a wheat plant grow
with very low levels of protein
in almost a desert
in this country
simply by putting synthetic
fertilizers on the ground.
But what happens is slowly
we're producing newer deserts.
To turn that soil into
a functional soil again,
you've got to put nutrients
back into the soil.
You've got to put worms
You've got to put probiotics
back into the soil.
And then you've got to start
cultivating it properly again
and really looking after it.
The same with organics.
If you don't put the nutrients
into the soil and the nutrients
that go into the soil
are the nutrients that
come from the compost, from the
breakdown of the previous crop
or the previous plant that was
there, if that humus doesn't
get back into the
soil, then the plants
will not produce all
of the ingredients that
are required for it to
grow well and produce
all the necessary phytochemicals
or plant chemicals that
are going to make us
healthy or the animals that
eat them healthy.
And I'll give an example.
If you, for example, grow
tomatoes artificially
and pick them green,
they flavorless
by the time they turn red.
You leave a tomato on the
bush in organic compost,
you end up with a tomato that
you can smell at about 3 meters
away, and it's ripe and red and
contains all of the ingredients
that are important in protecting
you against prostate cancer,
whereas the green tomato
picked early doesn't.
So it's not only a
matter of the fertilizer,
but it's also the
time of picking
and the ripening of the fruit.
And that applies right across
the board to all of the foods
that we consume.
Most of the foods
that we consume
are picked before they
ripen, and they're not
grown organically.
Organic, there is
a big difference
both in flavor,
taste, life force,
and the ingredients and
levels of ingredients in them.
It surprised me in
my clinical years
that nobody was interested
in the patients' diets.
When I spoke to my profs, they
weren't interested in diets.
The patients weren't
interested in diets
and neither were the hospitals.
So diet didn't come into it,
and whenever I mentioned it,
nutrition, it was
basically put to the side.
Yet, the patients in the
beds that I was treating
were obviously malnourished,
underweight quite often,
sometimes obese, but definitely
showing signs of deficiencies,
and these were not treated.
Classical case was
a cancer patient.
She'd just been operated on.
She was underweight, and she
was receiving intravenous salt
and sugar solutions and
no nutrients at all,
and we were
wondering why she was
getting wound
infections and chest
infections and poor immunity.
And you point out the obvious
deficiencies to the students
and to the teachers, and
it just basically went
over their heads.
There are a lot of studies
in animal nutrition
that can be related back to
human health and human illness
and human disease.
But one of the
classical ones was
one where calves were purposely
fed a selenium-deficient diet
to produce white muscle disease,
because back in the '60s,
some of the
restaurants and hotels
wanted white meat to put
on the tables, white veal,
and the best way of
producing white veal
was to produce animals
with white muscle disease.
When these animals
were slaughtered,
of course, their meat
was white and what
the restaurants wanted.
The thing that didn't ring
a bell with me at the time
was that their hearts were
very, very much enlarged,
and it took me three years
into medicine to realize,
after studying heart disease
and seeing some patients
with cardiomyopathies, which are
enlarged hearts, that there was
a relationship between
the selenium deficiency
that we caused the white
muscle disease in the animal
and selenium deficiency and
cardiomyopathy in humans.
Now, there has been some
documentation of that,
but it's very rare.
In fact, it never
happens in this country
that a cardiologist
or a cardiac surgeon
would look at a selenium
deficiency in a patient
with cardiomyopathy.
And usually patients
with cardiomyopathy,
if it's serious enough and
their heart failure regime
fails, that they go on the
list for a cardiac transplant.
And we have actually
prevented a number of patients
from going on to
transplant simply
by boosting up their
heart muscle with selenium
and appropriate
antioxidants, Coenzyme q10.
So massive savings in
terms of human suffering,
life, cost of health
care delivery.
And it's a very,
very important lesson
that we should not be
ignoring the importance
of trace elements.
[MUSIC PLAYING]